---
title: The BIN-CSR Sparse Matrix Format
layout: post
tags: [math, physics]
comments: false
math: false
jquery: true
threejs: true
dramaschool: true
---

<style>
div.container-3js canvas {
    background-color: #000;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
    padding: 0;
    margin: 0;
    position: static;
}

#{{ page.title | slugify }}-original-matrix {
    height: 200px;
}

#{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr-intermediate {
    height: 256px;
}

#{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr {
    height: 128px;
}

div.centered {
    text-align: center;
}

</style>

<script>
// Interaction callbacks
var interactResizeMatrix;
var interactResizeBin;
var interactUpdteMatrix;
</script>

BIN-CSR is a sparse, symmetric matrix format, originally described by Daniel Weber et. al [in their 2012 paper](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2012.03227.x/full) on GPU data structures. BIN-CSR is suitable for applications which use massively parallelized matrix operations, like some GPU-based [finite element method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_element_method) solvers.

The diagonal elements of the matrix are stored separately, to enable fast [_preconditioning_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preconditioner) of the matrix. Preconditioning is a step which allows for faster convergence when performing a system solving method like the [conjugate gradient method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjugate_gradient_method).

The WebGL demos on this page aim to demonstrate the construction of a BIN-CSR matrix in an interactive way.

The following is a dramatically over-engineered representation of our original matrix. Drag the slider to change the dimensions of the matrix.

<div class="container-3js" id="{{ page.title | slugify }}-original-matrix"></div>
<div class="centered">
<input type="range" min="1" max="32" step="1" value="8" oninput="interactResizeMatrix(this.value)">
</div>

The elements of this matrix are packed into padded _bins_. Each bin contains a set number of rows worth of data. The number of rows contained in a bin is called the _bin width_. The following is an illustration of bin data packing. The slider can be used to adjust the bin width.

<div class="container-3js" id="{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr-intermediate"></div>
<div class="centered">
<input type="range" min="1" max="32" step="1" value="3" oninput="interactResizeBin(this.value)">
</div>

The above visual shows the theoretical grouping of the data. The actual layout of the data in memory is optimized for [coallesced memory access on the GPU](https://mc.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/images/0/0a/M02_4.pdf). In actuality, the data is stored in four separate arrays, visualized here:

<div class="container-3js" id="{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr"></div>

The values in the pointer array (gray) are indices into the value and column arrays (black), indicating the starting index for each row. The pointer values are represented by gray connecting lines.

<script type="text/javascript">

{% include js/sceneactor.js %}
{% include js/bincsr.js %}
{% include js/matrix-quad-actor.js %}
{% include js/bincsr-quad-actor.js %}
{% include js/bincsr-intermediate-quad-actor.js %}


$(document).ready(function() {

    // Raw data
    var matrix = [
        [1, 1, 0, 2, 0, 0, 4, 0],
        [1, 2, 0, 3, 3, 0, 2, 0],
        [0, 0, 3, 3, 5, 8, 6, 9],
        [2, 3, 3, 4, 3, 0, 0, 0],
        [0, 3, 5, 3, 5, 0, 0, 0],
        [0, 0, 8, 0, 0, 6, 2, 1],
        [4, 2, 6, 0, 0, 2, 7, 0],
        [0, 0, 9, 0, 0, 1, 0, 8]
    ];
    var matrix_size = 8;
    var sparsity = 0.2;
    var bin_size = 3;
    var bincsrIntermediate = new BinCSRIntermediate(bin_size, matrix);
    var bincsr = new BinCSR(bincsrIntermediate);

    // Actor references
    var matrixQuadActor;
    var bincsrIntermediateQuadActor;
    var bincsrQuadActor;

    // Scene references
    var originalMatrixScene;
    var bincsrIntermediateScene;
    var bincsrScene;

    //
    // Interaction callbacks
    //

    interactResizeMatrix = function(size) {
        matrix_size = size;
        interactUpdateMatrix();
    }

    interactResizeBin = function(size) {
        bin_size = size;
        interactUpdateMatrix();
    }

    interactUpdateMatrix = function() {

        // Resize the matrix with random values.
        while (matrix_size < matrix.length) {
            matrix.pop();
            for (var i = 0; i < matrix.length; ++i) {
                matrix[i].pop();
            }
        }
        while (matrix_size > matrix.length) {
            var new_row = [];
            for (var i = 0; i < matrix.length; ++i) {
                var dice = Math.random();
                var val = dice < sparsity ? 1 + Math.floor(Math.random() * Math.floor(9)) : 0;
                matrix[i].push(val);
                new_row.push(val);
            }
            new_row.push(1 + Math.floor(Math.random() * Math.floor(8)));
            matrix.push(new_row);
        }

        // Update the actors in the world with the new matrix
        matrixQuadActor.set_matrix(matrix);
        bincsrIntermediate = new BinCSRIntermediate(bin_size, matrix);
        bincsrIntermediateQuadActor.set_inter(bincsrIntermediate);
        bincsr = new BinCSR(bincsrIntermediate);
        bincsrQuadActor.set_bincsr(bincsr);

        // Update the scene cameras to contain the entire quads
        originalMatrixScene.cameraHeightTarget = matrixQuadActor.height+1;
        bincsrIntermediateScene.cameraHeightTarget = (bincsrIntermediateQuadActor.height/2)+1;
    }

    //
    // Set up scenes
    //

    {
        var container = $("#{{ page.title | slugify }}-original-matrix");
        originalMatrixScene = new SceneActor(container, 5);
        DRAMA.add(originalMatrixScene);
        matrixQuadActor = new MatrixQuadActor(originalMatrixScene.scene, matrix);
        DRAMA.add(matrixQuadActor);
    }

    {
        var container = $("#{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr-intermediate");
        bincsrIntermediateScene = new SceneActor(container, 8);
        DRAMA.add(bincsrIntermediateScene);
        bincsrIntermediateQuadActor = new BinCSRIntermediateQuadActor(bincsrIntermediateScene.scene, bincsrIntermediate);
        DRAMA.add(bincsrIntermediateQuadActor);
    }

    {
        var container = $("#{{ page.title | slugify }}-bin-csr");
        bincsrScene = new SceneActor(container, 6);
        DRAMA.add(bincsrScene);
        bincsrQuadActor = new BinCSRQuadActor(bincsrScene.scene, bincsr);
        DRAMA.add(bincsrQuadActor);
    }
});

</script>
